---
title: French Art
subtitle: Shamelessly Copied from Wikipedia
weight: 3
type: essay
contributor:
  - first_name: Élie
    last_name: Faure
    bio: "Élie Faure, born in Sainte-Foy-la-Grande on April 4, 1873 and died in
    Paris on October 30, 1937, is a French doctor, art historian and essayist,
    and the author of an important *History of Art* which remains a reference in
    this discipline."
additional_references:
  - de Goncourt 1851
---

French art consists of the visual and plastic arts (including architecture,
woodwork, textiles, and ceramics) originating from the geographical area of
France. Modern France was the main center for the European art of the Upper
Paleolithic, then left many megalithic monuments, and in the Iron Age many of
the most impressive finds of early Celtic art. The Gallo-Roman period left a
distinctive provincial style of sculpture, and the region around the modern
Franco-German border led the empire in the mass production of finely
decorated Ancient Roman pottery, which was exported to Italy and elsewhere on a
large scale. With Merovingian art the story of French styles as a distinct and
influential element in the wider development of the art of Christian Europe
begins. ({{< q-cite "Faure 1909" "54" >}})

France can fairly be said to have been a leader in the development of Romanesque
art and Gothic art, before the Italian Renaissance led to Italy replacing France
as the main source of stylistic developments until the age of Louis XIV, when
France largely regained this role, holding it until the mid-twentieth century.

## Contents

- Early Modern Period
  - Baroque and Classicism
  - Rococo and Neoclassicism
- Modern Period
  - 19th Century
  - 20th Century

## Early Modern Period

In the late fifteenth century, the French invasion of Italy and the proximity of
the vibrant Burgundy court, with its Flemish connections, brought the French
into contact with the goods, paintings, and the creative spirit of the Northern
and Italian Renaissance. Initial artistic changes at that time in France were
executed by Italian and Flemish artists, such as Jean Clouet and his son
François Clouet, along with the Italians, Rosso Fiorentino, Francesco
Primaticcio, and Niccolò dell'Abbate of what is often called the first School of
Fontainebleau from 1531. Leonardo da Vinci also was invited to France by
François I, but other than the paintings which he brought with him, he produced
little for the French king. ({{< q-cite "Rosenblum 1967" "103" >}})

The art of the period from François I through Henri IV often is heavily inspired
by late Italian pictorial and sculptural developments commonly referred to as
Mannerism, which is associated with Michelangelo and Parmigianino, among others.
It is characterized by figures which are elongated and graceful that rely upon
visual rhetoric, including the elaborate use of allegory and mythology.
({{< q-cite "Rosen and Zerner 1984" >}}) Perhaps the greatest accomplishment of
the French Renaissance was the construction of the Châteaux of the Loire Valley.
No longer conceived of as fortresses, such pleasure palaces took advantage of
the richness of the rivers and lands of the Loire region and they show
remarkable architectural skill.

### Baroque and Classicism

The seventeenth century marked a golden age for French art in all fields. In the
early part of the seventeenth century, late mannerist and early Baroque
tendencies continued to flourish in the court of Marie de Medici and Louis XIII.
Art from this period shows influences from both the north of Europe, namely the
Dutch and Flemish schools, and from Roman painters of the Counter-Reformation.
Artists in France frequently debated the contrasting merits of Peter Paul Rubens
with his the Flemish baroque, voluptuous lines and colors to Nicolas Poussin
with his rational control, proportion, Roman classicism. Another proponent of
classicism working in Rome was Claude Gellée, known as Le Lorrain, who defined
the form of classical landscape.

{{< q-figure id="1.4" >}}

{{< q-figure id="1.1" >}}

Many young French painters of the beginning of the century went to Rome to train
themselves and soon assimilated Caravaggio's influence like Valentin de Boulogne
and Simon Vouet. The later is credited with bringing the baroque in France and
at his return in Paris in 1627 he was named first painter of the king. But
French painting soon departed from the extravagance and naturalism of the
Italian baroque and painters like Eustache Le Sueur and Laurent de La Hyre,
following Poussin example developed a classicist way known as "Parisian
atticism", inspired by Antiquity, and focusing on proportion, harmony and the
importance of drawing. Even Vouet, after his return from Italy, changed his
manner to a more measured but still highly decorative and elegant style.

But at the same time there was still a strong Caravaggisti school represented in
the period by the amazing candle-lit paintings of Georges de La Tour. The
wretched and the poor were featured in a quasi-Dutch manner in the paintings by
the three Le Nain brothers. In the paintings of Philippe de Champaigne there are
both propagandistic portraits of Louis XIII' s minister Cardinal Richelieu and
other more contemplative portraits of people in the Catholic Jansenist sect. In
architecture, architects like Salomon de Brosse, François Mansart and Jacques
Lemercier helped define the French form of the baroque, developing the formula
of the urban hôtel particulier that was to influence all of Europe and strongly
departed from the Italian equivalent, the palazzo. Many aristocratic castles
were rebuilt in the new classic- baroque style, some of the most famous being
Maisons and Cheverny, characterized by high roofs "à la française" and a form
that retained the medieval model of the castle adorned with prominent towers.

From the mid to late seventeenth century, French art is more often referred to
by the term "Classicism" which implies an adherence to certain rules of
proportion and sobriety uncharacteristic of the Baroque, as it was practiced in
southern and eastern Europe during the same period. Under Louis XIV, the Baroque
as it was practiced in Italy, was not in French taste, for instance, as
Bernini's famous proposal for redesigning the Louvre was rejected by Louis XIV.
Georges de La Tour, The Penitent Magdalene, c. 1640.
({{< q-cite "Berson 1996" "233" >}})

{{< q-figure-group id="1.6, 1.7" caption="This group caption supercedes individual captions." >}}

Through propaganda, wars, and great architectural works, Louis XIV launched a
vast program designed for the glorification of France and his name. The Palace
of Versailles, initially a tiny hunting lodge built by his father, was
transformed by Louis XIV into a marvelous palace for fêtes and parties, under
the direction of architects Louis Le Vau (who had also built the château de
Vaux-le-Vicomte) and Jules Hardouin Mansart (who built the church of the
Invalides in Paris), painter and designer Charles Le Brun, and the landscape
architect André Le Nôtre who perfected the rational form of the French garden
that from Versailles spread in all of Europe.

For sculpture Louis XIV's reign also proved an important moment thanks to the
King's protection of artists like Pierre Puget, François Girardon and
Charles-Antoine Coysevox. In Rome, Pierre Legros, working in a more baroque
manner, was one of the most influential sculptors of the end of the century.

### Rococo and Neoclassicism

Rococo and Neoclassicism are terms used to describe the visual and plastic arts
and architecture in Europe from the late seventeenth to the late eighteenth
centuries. In France, the death ofLouis XIV in 1715 lead to a period of freedom
commonly called the Régence. Versailles was abandoned from 1715 to 1722, the
young king Louis XV and the government led by the duke of Orléans residing in
Paris. There a new style emerged in the decorative arts, known as rocaille : the
asymmetry and dynamism of the baroque was kept but renewed in a style that is
less rhetoric and with less pompous effects, a deeper research of artificiality
and use of motifs inspired by nature. This manner used to decorate rooms and
furniture also existed in painting. Rocaillle painting turned toward lighters
subjects, like the "fêtes galantes", theater settings, pleasant mythological
narratives and the female nude. Most of the times the moralising sides of myths
or history paintings are omitted and the accent is put on the decorative and
pleasant aspect of the scenes depicted. Paintings from the period show an
emphasis more on color than drawing, with apparent brush strokes and very
colorful scenes. Important painters from this period include Antoine Watteau,
considered the inventor of thefête galante, Nicolas Lancret and François
Boucher.

{{< q-figure id="1.8" class="is-pulled-right" >}}

The Louis XV style of decoration, although already apparent at the end of the
last reign, was lighter with pastel colors, wood panels, smaller rooms, less
gilding, and fewer brocades; shells, garlands, and occasional Chinese subjects
predominated. The Chantilly, Vincennes and then Sèvres manufactures produced
some of the finest porcelain of the time. The highly skilled ébénistes,
cabinet-makers mostly based in Paris, created elaborate pieces of furniture with
precious wood and bronze ornaments that were to be highly praised and imitated
in all of Europe. The most famous are Jean-François Oeben, who created the work
desk of king Louis XV in Versailles, and Bernard II van Risamburgh. Rooms in
châteaux and hôtels particuliers were more intimate than during the reign of
Louis XIV and were decorated with rocaille style boiseries (carved wood pannels
covering the walls of a room) conceived by architects like Germain Boffrand or
ornemanistes (designers of decorative objects) likeJuste-Aurèle Meissonnier.

The most prominent architects of the first half of the century were, apart
Boffrand, Robert de Cotte and Ange-Jacques Gabriel, who designed public squares
like theplace de la Concordein Paris and the place de la Bourse in Bordeaux in a
style consciously inspired by that of the era of Louis XIV. During the first
half of the century, France replaced Italy as the artistic centre and main
artistic influence in Europe and many French artists worked in other courts
across the continent.

The latter half of the eighteenth century continued to see French preeminence in
Europe, particularly through the arts and sciences, and the speaking the French
language was expected for members of the European courts. The French academic
system continued to produce artists, but some, such as Jean-Honoré Fragonard and
Jean-Baptiste-Siméon Chardin, explored new and increasingly impressionist styles
of painting with thick brushwork. Although the hierarchy of genres continued to
be respected officially, genre painting, landscape, portrait, and still life
were extremely fashionable. Chardin and Jean-Baptiste Oudrywere hailed for their
still lives although this was officially considered the lowest of all genres in
the hierarchy of painting subjects.

{{< q-figure id="1.10" class="is-pulled-left" >}}

One also finds in this period a Pre-romanticist aspect. Hubert Robert's images
of ruins, inspired by Italian cappricio paintings, are typical in this respect
as well as the image of storms and moonlight marines by Claude Joseph Vernet. So
too the change from the rational and geometricalFrench garden of André Le Nôtre
to the English garden, which emphasized artificially wild and irrational nature.
One also finds in some of these gardens—curious ruins of temples—called
"follies".

The middle of the eighteenth century saw a turn to Neoclassicism in France, that
is to say a conscious use of Greek and Roman forms and iconography. This
movement was promoted by intellectuals like Diderot, in reaction to the
artificiality and the decorative essence of the rocaille style. In painting, the
greatest representative of this style is Jacques-Louis David, who, mirroring the
profiles of Greek vases, emphasized the use of the profile. His subject matter
often involved classical history such as the death of Socrates and Brutus. The
dignity and subject matter of his paintings were greatly inspired by Nicolas
Poussin in the seventeenth century. Poussin and David were in turn major
influences on Jean Auguste Dominique Ingres. Other important neoclassical
painters of the period are Jean-Baptiste Greuze and Joseph-Marie Vien.
Neoclassicism also penetrated decorative arts and architecture.

Architects like Ledoux and Boullée developed a radical style of neoclassical
architecture based on simple and pure geometrical forms with a research of
simetry and harmony, elaborating visionary projects like the complex of the
Saltworks of Arc-et-Senans by Ledoux, a model of an ideal factory developed from
the rational concepts of theEnlightmentthinkers.

## Modern Period

### 19th Century

The French Revolution and the Napoleonic wars brought great changes to the arts
in France. The program of exaltation and myth making attendant to the Emperor
Napoleon I of France was closely coordinated in the paintings of David, Gros and
Guérin. Jean-Auguste-Dominique Ingreswas the main figure of neoclassicism until
the 1850s and a prominent teacher, giving priority to drawing over color.
Meanwhile, Orientalism, Egyptian motifs, the tragic anti-hero, the wild
landscape, the historical novel, and scenes from the Middle Ages and the
Renaissance —all these elements ofRomanticism—created a vibrant period that
defies easy classification. The most important romantic painter of the period
was Eugène Delacroix, who had a successful public career and was the main
opponent of Ingres. Before him, Théodore Géricault opened the path to
romanticism with his monumental Raft of the Medusa exposed at the 1819 Salon.
Camille Corot tried to escape the conventional and idealized form of landscape
painting influenced by classicism to be more realist and sensible to atmospheric
variations at the same time.

{{< q-figure id="1.11" >}}

Romantic tendencies continued throughout the century, both idealized landscape
painting and Naturalism have their seeds in Romanticism. The work of Gustave
Courbet and the Barbizon school are logical developments from it, as is the late
nineteenth century Symbolism of such painters as Gustave Moreau, the professor
of Henri Matisse and Georges Rouault, as well as Odilon Redon. Academic painting
developed at the Ecole des Beaux-Arts was the most successful with the public
and the State : highly trained painters like Jean-Léon Gérôme, William
Bouguereau and Alexandre Cabanel painted historical scenes inspired by the
antique, following the footsteps of Ingres and the neoclassics. Though
criticized for their conventionalism by the young avant-garde painters and
critics, the most talented of the Academic painters renewed the historical
genre, drawing inspiration from multiple cultures and techniques, like the
Orient and the new framings made possible by the invention of photography

{{< q-figure id="1.12" >}}

For many critics EÉdouard Manet wrote of the nineteenth century and the modern
period (much as Charles Baudelaire does in poetry). His rediscovery of Spanish
painting from the golden age, his willingness to show the unpainted canvas, his
exploration of the forthright nude, and his radical brush strokes are the first
steps toward Impressionism. Impressionism would take the Barbizon school one
step farther, rejecting once and for all a belabored style and the use of mixed
colors and black, for fragile transitive effects of light as captured outdoors
in changing light (partly inspired by the paintings of J. M. W. Turner and
Eugène Boudin). It led to Claude Monet with his cathedrals and haystacks,
Pierre-Auguste Renoir with both his early outdoor festivals and his later
feathery style of ruddy nudes, Edgar Degas with his dancers and bathers. Other
important impressionists wereAlfred Sisley, Camille Pissarroand Gustave
Caillebotte.

After that threshold was crossed, the next thirty years became a litany of
amazing experiments. Vincent van Gogh, Dutch born, but living in France, opened
the road to expressionism. Georges Seurat, influenced by color theory, devised a
pointillist technique that governed the Impressionist experiment and was
followed by Paul Signac. Paul Cézanne, a painter's painter, attempted a
geometrical exploration of the world, that left many of his peers indifferent.
Paul Gauguin, a banker, found symbolism in Brittany along Emile Bernard and then
exoticism and primitivism in French Polynesia. Les Nabis, a movement of the
1890s, regrouping painters such as Paul Sérusier, Pierre Bonnard, Édouard
Vuillard and Maurice Denis, was influenced by Gauguin's example in Brittany :
they explored a decorative art in flat plains with the graphic approach of a
Japanese print. They preached that a work of art is the end product and the
visual expression of an artist's synthesis of nature in personal aesthetic
metaphors and symbols. Henri Rousseau, the self-taught dabbling postmaste,r
became the model for the naïve revolution.

### 20th Century

{{< q-figure id="1.13" class="is-pulled-right" >}}

The early years of the twentieth century were dominated by experiments in colour
and content that Impressionism and Post-Impressionism had unleashed. The
products of the far east also brought new influences. At roughly the same time,
Les Fauves (Henri Matisse, André Derain, Maurice de Vlaminck, Albert Marquet,
Raoul Dufy, Othon Friesz, Charles Camoin, Henri Manguin) exploded into color,
much like German Expressionism. ({{< q-cite "Broude 1991" >}})

The discovery of African tribal masks by Pablo Picasso, a Spaniard living in
Paris, lead him to create his Les Demoiselles d'Avignon of 1907. Working
independently, Picasso and Georges Braque returned to and refined Cézanne's way
of rationally comprehension of objects in a flat medium, their experiments in
cubism also would lead them to integrate all aspects and objects of day-to-day
life,collage of newspapers, musical instruments, cigarettes, wine, and other
objects into their works. Cubism in all its phases would dominate paintings of
Europe and America for the next ten years. (See the article on Cubism for a
complete discussion.)

World War I did not stop the dynamic creation of art in France. In 1916 a group
of discontents met in a bar in Zurich, the Cabaret Voltaire, and created the
most radical gesture possible, the anti-art of Dada. At the same time, Francis
Picabia and Marcel Duchamp were exploring similar notions. At a 1917 art show
inNew York, Duchamp presented a white porcelain urinal (Fountain) signed R. Mutt
as work of art, becoming the father of thereadymade.

When Dada reached Paris, it was avidly embraced by a group of young artists and
writers who were fascinated with the writings of Sigmund Freud, particularly by
his notion of the unconscious mind. The provocative spirit of Dada became linked
to the exploration of the unconscious mind through the use of automatic writing,
chance operations, and, in some cases, altered states. The surrealists quickly
turned to painting and sculpture. The shock of unexpected elements, the use of
Frottage, collage, and decalcomania, the rendering of mysterious landscapes and
dreamed images were to become the key techniques through the rest of the 1930s.

Immediately after this war the French art scene diverged roughly in two
directions. There were those who continued in the artistic experiments from
before the war, especially surrealism, and others who adopted the newAbstract
Expressionismand action painting from New York, executing them in a French
manner using Tachism or L'art informel. Parallel to both of these tendencies,
Jean Dubuffet dominated the early post-war years while exploring childlike
drawings, grafiti, and cartoons in a variety of media.

The late 1950s and early 1960s in France saw art forms that might be considered
Pop Art. Yves Klein had attractive nude women roll around in blue paint and
throw themselves at canvases. Victor Vasarely invented Op-Art by designing
sophisticated optical patterns. Artists of the Fluxus movement such as Ben
Vautier incorporated graffiti and found objects into their work. Niki de
Saint-Phalle created bloated and vibrant plastic figures. Arman gathered
together found objects in boxed or resin-coated assemblages, and César
Baldaccini produced a series of large compressed object-sculptures. In May 1968,
the radical youth movement, through their atelier populaire, produced a great
deal of poster-art protesting the moribund policies of president Charles de
Gaulle.

{{< q-figure id="1.14" >}}
